# Going around your machine and commands

Before you install any package, first get the latest description of
packages from the source using the following command.

      sudo apt-get update

After the package database is updated, you can upgrade all the packages
you installed to the latest version using the following command.

      sudo apt-get upgrade

You can now install packages that you need usin the following command.
Example shows how to install a package called fortune. The command
"fortune" provided by this package is funny. Run it and see for
yourself.

      sudo apt-get install fortune

The command "/usr/bin/info" shows the documentation about Linux in a
structured manner. You can use the arrow keys to navigate to each
section, press enter to browse. Use "\<" to go back and "q" to quit. The
experience of navigation using "info" command is like a text-based
browser.

## file
Linux does not rely on file extensions to know what type of a file it is. The characters that
come after the dot have no special meaning. You can rename a file from
"something.jpg" to "something.png" and the system will not bother. Use
the command "/usr/bin/file something.jpg" to see what the system says.
Change the file name using "mv something.jpg something.png" and run the
command "/usr/bin/file something.png" and see that the system reports
the file to be of the same type. At the beginning of the file, there are
few magic characters that are read by the tool "/usr/bin/file" to
determine what type of a file it is. The name does not matter.

Use this utility "/usr/bin/file" on files in the directories "/usr/bin/"
or "/bin" to see which of them are ELF executables and which are shell
scripts. If a file is a shell script, you can use "cat" or "less" or
"more" to view the contents of that command. You would notice that all
shell scripts come in a particular format where the first line starts
with "\#!/bin/sh" which tells the system that the script should be run
using the shell "/bin/sh". Lines that start with "\#" are comments for
documentation purpose.

## cal
Use the command "/usr/bin/cal" to view the calendar of the current
month. Use it with month and year as arguments to see the calendar of
any month or year -- either in past or future. Eg., use "cal Aug 1947"
to see the calendar of the August month of the year 1947. Check out
which day of the week you were born using this command.

## ncal
Use the command "/usr/bin/ncal" to display the calendar with the week
days in vertical stacking as opposed to horizontal stacking used in the
output of the command "cal". Rest of the features are same.

## date
Use the command "date" to see the current time and date. You can
customize the format being displayed too. See the following example:

      date +"%A %d %B %Y"

See for yourself how the output looks like.

## Homework

1.  Write a command that displays the weekday of your friends birthday
    in full form as the output. Eg., if your friend was born on a
    Friday, the output of the command should be Friday.
2.  Create images using the tool "gimp" and export to different formats
    like png, tiff, jpg, gif and bmp. Use the "file" command to see what
    the system knows about these formats.
3.  Create a command that lists all the shell scripts in the directory
    "/bin".
